Docs: rewrite data source intro (#61639)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/datasources/_index.md

# Data sources

Grafana has built-in support for a wide range of _data sources_.
These data sources might be files, services, or databases.

> You can also extend the supported data sources through one of the many [Plugins](/grafana/plugins/) (or build your own).

Reviewer: wrong link?
I guess you wanted to link to https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/

Reviewer: "build your own" could be linked to https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/

Author: Good idea about adding the link to the build instructions. https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/61639/commits/b3e48d45922cf3331c71ef0c8fe6251901d59391

> You can also extend the supported data sources through one of the many [Plugins](/grafana/plugins/) (or build your own).

Reviewer: Not sure how we usually talk about them - `supported` vs `built-in`

Author: Yeah, that might be a little bit of language from k6 docs. I wanted to avoid jargon like "native" or "out of the box".

I think we can avoid this issue entirely by just using _support_ as a verb.

> Grafana supports a wide range of _data sources_.

Shorter sentence, too :-) .

Author: It's also consistent, since it's the exact language of https://grafana.com/tutorials/build-a-data-source-plugin/

Author: [54e3654](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/61639/commits/54e3654f2224c8491ad3cc6a031520d8f0a950c2)

# Data sources

Grafana supports a wide range of _data sources_.
These data sources might be files, services, or databases.

> You can also extend the supported data sources through one of the many [Plugins](/grafana/plugins/) (or [build your own](/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/)).

Reviewer 2: So this is a little nuanced, but you can't leverage a data source without a plugin. This makes it seem that plugins do something "extra" to data sources. 

Perhaps:
You can enable data sources by installing and configuring their associated Grafana plugins. For a list of available plugins, see [](). Alternatively, you can create your own, custom plugin. To learn more refer to []()

(I have a personal vendetta against unintroduced hyperlinks—feel free to ignore that)

Author: Hmm maybe I misunderstand. I thought Grafana had two models to use data sources:

- Built-in support. These ship with the Grafana binary, and they do not need to be installed.
- Extended through plugins. These have to be added from the available plugin list, or custom built.

Am I off here? I see that in some instances, the Grafana site says "plugin" to mean built-in data source.

> Loki Data Source - Native Plugin
> This is a built in data source that allows you to connect to the Loki logging service. [^1]

In my opinion, Grafana should avoid calling things that ship with the base binary a "plugin". I worry that this could corrode associations of meaning in the reader's heads, since, as far as I'm aware, plugin typically means an optional component to add to the system. It implies some customizability and tells people who don't want to use this data source that they can keep their binary footprint lighter by not installing it.

To call Loki a plugin implies that it could be plugged out, but that's not really true―it'd be more like rewiring.

I think saying things like "supported data source" or "built-in support" reduces cognitive reader load. To use _plugin_ to mean "outside of the base binary" creates a clear distinction. This is all to say that, if I haven't missed something, I'd prefer to try to reduce terms like "native plugin" in other places rather than introduce them here.

Does that make sense?

[^1]: https://grafana.com/grafana/plugins/loki/

Author: > This makes it seem that plugins do something "extra" to data sources.

I see your point about this sentence, though. What about this?

```diff
- You can also extend the supported data sources through one of the many [Plugins]
+ You can also add more data sources with Plugins
```

@Eve832 what do you think?  (ignoring the hyperlink―that's not a big deal to me).

Reviewer 2: There are only like 13 data sources that we natively support (fewer in Cloud I think). There are 80+ data sources. All of those not supported require a plugin

Author: I just pushed that text to make the review more streamlined:
https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/61639/commits/4bd9fb7535d031e67b546716cc3e9e2d5f36a3d3

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I this is def more clear

Each data source comes with a _query editor_, which formulates custom queries according to the source's particular structure.
After you add a data source, you can use it as an input for many operations:
- Query the data with [Explore]({{< relref "../explore" >}}).

> - Visualize it in in [panels]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations" >}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Visualize it in [panels]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations" >}}).
```

> - Make criteria for [alerts]({{< relref "../alerting" >}}).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create rules for [alerts]({{< relref "../alerting" >}}).
```

# Data sources

Grafana comes with built-in support for many _data sources_.
If you need other data sources, you can also install one of the many data source plugins.

> If the plugin you need doesn't exist, you can also create your own custom plugin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the plugin you need doesn't exist, you can develop a custom plugin.
```

Each data source comes with a _query editor_,

> which formulates custom queries according to the source's particular structure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which formulates custom queries according to the source's structure.
```

> After you add and configure a data source, you can use it as an input for many operations:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you add and configure a data source, you can use it as an input for many operations, including:
```

- Query the data with [Explore]({{< relref "../explore" >}}).
- Visualize it in [panels]({{< relref "../panels-visualizations" >}}).
- Create rules for [alerts]({{< relref "../alerting" >}}).

> This documentation goes over how to manage data sources in general,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This documentation describes how to manage data sources in general,
```

and how to configure or query the built-in data sources.
For other data sources, refer to the list of [datasource plugins](/grafana/plugins/).

> To make a custom plugin, refer to [Build a plugin]({{< relref "../developers/plugins/" >}}).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To develop a custom plugin, refer to [Build a plugin]({{< relref "../developers/plugins/" >}}).
```
